## Oil Interests
Oil companies of course have a vested interest in maintaining strong demand for any and all of their products. It is worth keeping in mind that because a barrel of oil produces many different products, (propane, butane, gasoline, jet, diesel, heavy shipping fuel oils, asphalt, petroleum coke, to name a few), a change in demand for any one product will not necessarily mean that the economics of processing that barrel of crude have changed. If diesel demand remains heavy while gasoline demand falls, as has happened in Europe, refineries will continue to operate, with diesel production maximized. Other products are still sold, however they may command a much lower price than in a more favorable economic environment. In the end, while a shift in the transportation fuels market may change the economics of how the products in a barrel of crude are split, it does not necessarily mean that the crude will stay in the ground.

It has been made clear that oil companies [are indeed pushing against increasing the CAFE standards](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/are-weaker-fuel-efficiency-standards-based-on-faulty-logic/), which is to be expected given what I said above. It is [the role of our EPA to protect the US citizens](https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/aboutepa/our-mission-and-what-we-do_.html), and manage the difficult balance of maintaining business competition while protecting the rights of individuals. This gets complicated quickly: A lot of money and jobs are potentially at stake, and each stakeholder will emphasize its case to regulators. Maintaining the status quo ensures that the existing system continues business-as-usual, including the continued damage to our environment, while upending the status quo could lead to innovation and birth of new businesses and jobs, but with some transitional upheaval that would require government intervention to manage, which brings us to the next driver.



## Customer Interest
Some of the analysis and arguments provided by some stakeholders seem to suggest that customer choices take place in a vacuum, that car company or dealership strategies do not persuade customers to choose some model of vehicle over another. In reality, customers are choosing from the selection placed before them. If a particular company does not offer a car of the right size or shape that the customer prefers (elevated position, hatchback, third row seating, etc), the customer will not demand it of them and hold their dollars until it is created. They will go to another source and purchase what they find to be the ideal product to meet their needs. 